Documentation for Property Routing in ASP.NET Core OData 8 (#276)
MicrosoftDocs/OData-docs: Odata-docs/webapi-8/fundamentals/property-routing.md

| `POST` | `~/{singleton}/{collectionvaluedproperty}` |
| `POST` | `~/{singleton}/{cast}/{collectionvaluedproperty}` |
| `PATCH` | `~/{entityset}/{key}/{singlevaluedproperty}` |
| `PATCH` | `~/{entityset}/{key}/{cast}/{singlevaluedproperty}` |
| `PATCH` | `~/{entityset}/{key}/{singlevaluedproperty}/{cast}` |
| `PATCH` | `~/{entityset}/{key}/{cast}/{singlevaluedproperty}/{cast}` |
| `PATCH` | `~/{singleton}/{singlevaluedproperty}` |
| `PATCH` | `~/{singleton}/{cast}/{singlevaluedproperty}` |
| `PATCH` | `~/{singleton}/{singlevaluedproperty}/{cast}` |
| `PATCH` | `~/{singleton}/{cast}/{singlevaluedproperty}/{cast}` |
| `DELETE` | `~/{entityset}/{key}/{nullableproperty}` |
| `DELETE` | `~/{entityset}/{key}/{cast}/{nullableproperty}` |
| `DELETE` | `~/{singleton}/{nullableproperty}` |
| `DELETE` | `~/{singleton}/{cast}/{nullableproperty}` |

**Notes:**
1. OData routing supports canonical parentheses-style key (e.g. `~/Customers(1)`) in addition to key-as-segment (e.g. `~/Customers/1`). Currently, ASP.NET Core OData 8 does not support key-as-segment convention in multi-part keys scenarios
2. `{cast}` is a placeholder for the fully-qualified name for a derived type

> To illustrate action routing convention, let's build a sample OData service.

Reviewer: is this action routing or property routing?

### Retrieving a property
The route templates for this request are:
- `GET ~/{entityset}({key})/{property}`
- `GET ~/{entityset}/{key}/{property}`
- `GET ~/{singleton}/{property}`

The following request returns `BillingAddress` property on customer 1:
```http
GET http://localhost:5000/odata/Customers(1)/BillingAddress
```

For the above request to be conventionally-routed, a controller action named `GetBillingAddress` that accepts the key parameter is expected:
```csharp
public ActionResult GetBillingAddress([FromRoute] int key)
{
    var customer = customers.SingleOrDefault(d => d.Id.Equals(key));

    if (customer == null)
    {
        return NotFound();
    }

    return Ok(customer.BillingAddress);
}
```

The following JSON payload shows the expected response:
```json
{
    "@odata.context": "http://localhost:5000/odata/$metadata#Customers(1)/BillingAddress",
    "Street": "Street 1A"
}
```

### Retrieving a property initialized to an instance of a derived type
The route templates for this request are:
- `GET ~/{entityset}({key})/{property}/{cast}`
- `GET ~/{entityset}/{key}/{property}/{cast}`
- `GET ~/{singleton}/{property}/{cast}`

> The following request returns `BillingAddress` property (_on customer 2_) initialized to an instance of `PostalAddress`:

Reviewer 2: Note sure if this is better or worse, but I feel like explicitly highlighting the "crux" of this scenario might help
```suggestion
The following request returns `BillingAddress` property (_on customer 2_) whose value is an instance of `PostalAddress`, which is derived from `Address`:
```

```http
GET http://localhost:5000/odata/Customers(2)/BillingAddress/PropertyRouting.Models.PostalAddress
```

For the above request to be conventionally-routed, a controller action named `GetBillingAddressOfPostalAddress` that accepts the key parameter is expected:
```csharp
public ActionResult GetBillingAddressOfPostalAddress([FromRoute] int key)
{
    var customer = customers.SingleOrDefault(d => d.Id.Equals(key));

    if (!(customer?.BillingAddress is PostalAddress billingAddress))
    {
        return NotFound();
    }

    return Ok(billingAddress);
}
```

The following JSON payload shows the expected response:
```json
{
    "@odata.context": "http://localhost:5000/odata/$metadata#Customers(2)/BillingAddress/PropertyRouting.Models.PostalAddress",
    "Street": "2A",
    "PostalCode": "14030"
}
```

> It is important to note that the controller action from [retrieving a property](#retrieving-a-property) section can adequately handle request for `BillingAddress` property that is initialized to an instance of `PostalAddress`. The request would look at follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is important to note that the controller action from [retrieving a property](#retrieving-a-property) section can adequately handle request for `BillingAddress` property that is initialized to an instance of `PostalAddress`. The request would look as follows:
```

```http
GET http://localhost:5000/odata/Customers(2)/BillingAddress
```

The following JSON payload shows the expected response:
```json
{
    "@odata.context": "http://localhost:5000/odata/$metadata#Customers(2)/BillingAddress",
    "Street": "2A",
    "PostalCode": "14030"
}
```

The cast segment is useful in explicitly expressing the specific type of instance expected on the property. If the instance is not of the expected type [a `404 Not Found` response should be returned](http://docs.oasis-open.org/odata/odata/v4.01/odata-v4.01-part2-url-conventions.html#sec_AddressingDerivedTypes).

### Retrieving a property declared on a derived type
The route templates for this request are:
- `GET ~/{entityset}({key})/{cast}/{property}`
- `GET ~/{entityset}/{key}/{cast}/{property}`
- `GET ~/{singleton}/{cast}/{property}`

> The following request returns `RegisteredAddress` property on enterprise customer 4:

Reviewer 2: I think it may make the example clearer if you point out here that `RegisteredAddress` is declared in the `EnterpriseCustomer` class but not in the parent `Customer` class. I know that can be inferred from the model classes, but it's possible the reader didn't notice it or doesn't have that context by the time they get to this section.

                new Address { Street = "Street 4C" }
            }
        }
    };
}
```

## Routing conventions for properties
In this section we cover the conventions for property routing and the controller actions (endpoints) required for the request to be routed successfully.

### Retrieving a property
The route templates for this request are:
- `GET ~/{entityset}({key})/{property}`
- `GET ~/{entityset}/{key}/{property}`
- `GET ~/{singleton}/{property}`

The following request returns `BillingAddress` property on customer 1:
```http
GET http://localhost:5000/odata/Customers(1)/BillingAddress
```

For the above request to be conventionally-routed, a controller action named `GetBillingAddress` that accepts the key parameter is expected:
```csharp
public ActionResult GetBillingAddress([FromRoute] int key)
{
    var customer = customers.SingleOrDefault(d => d.Id.Equals(key));

    if (customer == null)
    {
        return NotFound();
    }

    return Ok(customer.BillingAddress);
}
```

The following JSON payload shows the expected response:
```json
{
    "@odata.context": "http://localhost:5000/odata/$metadata#Customers(1)/BillingAddress",
    "Street": "Street 1A"
}
```

> ### Retrieving a property initialized to an instance of a derived type

Author: @habees No - "initialized to" just means "initialized to". Think of it this way:

```
public class Address {}

public class PostalAddress : Address {}

public class Customer
{
    public Address BillingAddress { get; set; }
}

Customer customer = new Customer();
customer.BillingAddress = new PostalAddress();
```

Based on the above illustration, the right thing to say is that `BillingAddress` property is initialized to an instance of the derived type, no?

> ### Retrieving a property initialized to an instance of a derived type

Reviewer 2: So, it's to say `customer.BillingAddress`'s value is an instance of `PostalAddress`.

I guess I was tripped up by the fact that "initialize" seems related to the initial value. 

For example if we had
```c#
// set initial value
customer = new Customer { ..., BillingAddress = new Address() };
// change the value
customer.BillingAddress = new PostalAddress();
```
Would you say in this case that the `BillingAddress()` is initialized to an instance of a derived type given that it was actually initialized with `Address`? Would it be clearer to say it is _set_ to an instance of a derived type?

Anyway, this is a nitpick. I think the clarification makes sense. Maybe you can also consider the following alternatives and pick whichever you think sounds clearest (including retaining the original version):
- Retrieving a property set to an instance of a derived type
- Retrieving a property whose value is an instance of a derived type

```

For the above request to be conventionally-routed, a controller action named `GetRegisteredAddressOfPostalAddressFromEnterpriseCustomer` that accepts the key parameter is expected:
```csharp
public ActionResult GetRegisteredAddressOfPostalAddressFromEnterpriseCustomer([FromRoute] int key)
{
    var enterpriseCustomer = customers.OfType<EnterpriseCustomer>().SingleOrDefault(d => d.Id.Equals(key));

    if (!(enterpriseCustomer?.RegisteredAddress is PostalAddress registeredAddress))
    {
        return NotFound();
    }

    return Ok(registeredAddress);
}
```

The following JSON payload shows the expected response:
```json
{
    "@odata.context": "http://localhost:5000/odata/$metadata#Customers(4)/PropertyRouting.Models.EnterpriseCustomer/RegisteredAddress/PropertyRouting.Models.PostalAddress",
    "Street": "Street 4B",
    "PostalCode": "22109"
}
```

### Retrieving the raw value of a primitive property
To retrieve the raw value of a primitive property, append `/$value` to that property's URL.

The route templates for this request are:

> - `GET ~/{entityset}({key})/{primitiveproperty}/$value`

Author: @habbes Without the `/$value` then you're talking about `GET ~/{entityset}({key})/{property}` in the **Retrieving a property** section

```http
GET http://localhost:5000/odata/Customers(1)/ContactPhones/$count
```

For the above request to be conventionally-routed, a controller action named `GetContactPhones` that accepts the key parameter is expected. The action should be decorated with `EnableQuery` attribute:
```csharp
[EnableQuery]
public ActionResult GetContactPhones([FromRoute] int key)
{
    var customer = customers.SingleOrDefault(d => d.Id.Equals(key));

    if (customer == null)
    {
        return NotFound();
    }

    return Ok(customer.ContactPhones);
}
```

The expected response is shown below:
```console
1
```

### Add an item to a collection-valued property
The route templates for this request are:
- `POST ~/{entityset}({key})/{collectionvaluedproperty}`
- `POST ~/{entityset}/{key}/{collectionvaluedproperty}`
- `POST ~/{singleton}/{collectionvaluedproperty}`

The following `POST` request adds an item to the `ContactPhones` primitive collection-valued property on customer 1:
```http
POST http://localhost:5000/odata/Customers(1)/ContactPhones
```

Here's the request body:
```json
{
    "value": "798-507-2014"
}
```

> The payload for adding an item to a primitive collection-valued property should be a JSON object containing a single property named `value`.

Author: You can't apply `/$value` to a complex or navigation property.
It's the reason why the route template is very specific: `~/{entityset}({key})/{primitiveproperty}/$value`

```csharp
public ActionResult PostToContactPhones([FromRoute] int key, [FromBody] string contactPhone)
{
    var customer = customers.SingleOrDefault(d => d.Id.Equals(key));

    if (customer == null)
    {
        return NotFound();
    }

    customer.ContactPhones.Add(contactPhone);

    return Accepted();
}
```

The response status code should be `201`. You can query for the entity to confirm the result of the `POST` operation.

### Adding an item to a collection-valued property declared on a derived type
The route templates for this request are:
- `POST ~/{entityset}({key})/{cast}/{collectionvaluedproperty}`
- `POST ~/{entityset}/{key}/{cast}/{collectionvaluedproperty}`
- `POST ~/{singleton}/{cast}/{collectionvaluedproperty}`

The following `POST` request adds an item to the `ShippingAddresses` complex collection-valued property on enterprise customer 3:
```http
POST http://localhost:5000/odata/Customers(3)/PropertyRouting.Models.EnterpriseCustomer/ShippingAddresses
```

Here's the request body:
```json
{
    "Street": "One Microsoft Way"
}
```

> Unlike adding an item to a primitive collection-valued property, the payload for adding an item to a complex collection-valued property is a JSON object of the complex type.

Author: @habbes It's a case of killing two birds using one stone. You realize that property routing routes templates are quite many and I had to be a bit frugal so the doc doesn't get even longer. To accomplish that, I added the primitive collection property to the base class and the complex collection property to the derived class - instead of having both category of properties on base and derived classes.

In the **Add an item to a collection-valued property** section I demonstrate 2 things:
 - Adding an item to a collection-valued property
 - Adding an item to a primitive collection-valued property

In the **Adding an item to a collection-valued property declared on a derived type** section I demonstrate 2 things:
- Adding an item to a collection-valued property declared on a derived type
- Adding an item to a complex collection-valued property

It's therefore right to say that **Adding an item to a collection-valued property declared on a derived type** section demonstrates _adding to a collection property_ and _adding to collection of complex types_, while **Add an item to a collection-valued property** section demonstrates _adding to a collection property_ and _adding to collection of primitive types_. I added the **note** about how the payload should look like in both scenarios. Otherwise I'd have to accommodate the following breakdown:
- Adding an item to a primitive collection-valued property
- Adding an item to a complex collection-valued property
- Adding an item to a primitive collection-valued property declared on a derived type
- Adding an item to a complex collection-valued property declared on a derived type

Even in the **retrieving** section, I used **Retrieving a property** in general to represent:
- Retrieving a primitive single-valued property
- Retrieving a complex single-valued property
- Retrieving a primitive collection-valued property
- Retrieving a complex collection-valued property

It's because the semantics are the same. There's no big difference between `~/Customers(1)/Name` (where `Name` is a primitive single-valued property), and `~/Customers(1)/BillingAddress` (where `BillingAddress` is a complex single-valued property), and `~/Customers(1)/ContactPhones` (where `ContactPhones` is a primitive collection-valued property):
```csharp
public ActionResult GetName([FromRoute] int key)
{
    //
    return Ok(customer.Name);
}

public ActionResult GetBillingAddress([FromRoute] int key)
{
    //
    return Ok(customer.BillingAddress);
}

public ActionResult GetContactPhones([FromRoute] int key)
{
    //
    return Ok(customer.ContactPhones);
}
```

If I took the breakdown/expressive route, I'd have to equally break down **Retrieving a property declared on a derived type** into:
- Retrieving a primitive single-valued property declared on a derived type
- Retrieving a complex single-valued property declared on a derived type
- Retrieving a primitive collection-valued property declared on a derived type
- Retrieving a complex collection-valued property declared on a derived type

 Let me know whether that clarifies or whether you still feel strongly about being more expressive or other alternative suggestions that you may have on how we can provide the clarity.

> Unlike adding an item to a primitive collection-valued property, the payload for adding an item to a complex collection-valued property is a JSON object of the complex type.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the clarifications. Your approach makes more sense.

The route templates for this request are:
- `DELETE ~/{entityset}({key})/{cast}/{nullableproperty}`
- `DELETE ~/{entityset}/{key}/{cast}/{nullableproperty}`
- `DELETE ~/{singleton}/{cast}/{nullableproperty}`

The following `DELETE` request deletes the `RegisteredAddress` property on customer 3:
```http
DELETE http://localhost:5000/odata/Customers(3)/PropertyRouting.Models.EnterpriseCustomer/RegisteredAddress
```

The request body is empty.

For the above request to be conventionally-routed, a controller action named `DeleteToRegisteredAddressFromEnterpriseCustomer` that accepts the key parameter is expected:
```csharp
public ActionResult DeleteToRegisteredAddressFromEnterpriseCustomer([FromRoute] int key)
{
    var enterpriseCustomer = customers.OfType<EnterpriseCustomer>().SingleOrDefault(d => d.Id.Equals(key));

    if (enterpriseCustomer == null)
    {
        return NotFound();
    }

    enterpriseCustomer.RegisteredAddress = null;

    return NoContent();
}
```

The response status code should be `204`. You can query for the entity to confirm the result of the `DELETE` operation.

## Property routing endpoint mappings

> If you went through this tutorial and implemented the logic in an OData service, you can run the application and visit the `$odata` endpoint (http://localhost:5000/$odata) to view the endpoint mappings.

Author: @habbes It was intentional. It was hard to accommodate all the applicable route templates for property routing. They are just too many. I figured that if I couldn't cover them all, I might as well leave out the screenshot. I also consider rendering them as markdown table... What would your thoughts on that be?

> If you went through this tutorial and implemented the logic in an OData service, you can run the application and visit the `$odata` endpoint (http://localhost:5000/$odata) to view the endpoint mappings.

Reviewer 2: Since you already have a markdown table at the top with all the templates, I think it's fine to leave it as is.
